THE FLOWER PRINCESS


I

ONCE upon a time there was a beautiful Princess named Fleurette, who
lived in a white marble palace on the top of a high hill. The Princess
Fleurette was very fond of flowers, and all around the palace, from the
very gates thereof, a fair garden, full of all kinds of wonderful
plants, sloped down to the foot of the hill, where it was snugly
inclosed with a high marble wall. Thus the hill was like a great nosegay
rising up in the midst of the land, sending out sweet odors to perfume
the air for miles, bright with color in the sunshine, and musical with
the chorus of birds and the hum of millions of bees.

One part of the garden was laid out in walks and avenues, with little
vine-clad bowers here and there, where the Princess could sit and read,
or lie and dream. There were fountains and statues among the trees, and
everything grand and stately to make a garden beautiful. Another part of
the garden was left wild and tangled, like a forest. Here all the shyest
flowers grew in their own wild way; and here ran a little brook,
gurgling over the pebbles in a race to the foot of the hill. There never
was seen a more complete and beautiful garden than this of the Princess
Fleurette.

Now the fame of the Princess's beauty, like the fragrance of her garden,
had been wafted a long way, and many persons came to prove it. A
continual procession of princes from lands near and far traveled the
long road that wound from the foot of the hill up and up and up to the
entrance of the palace. They came upon their noble steeds, with gold and
jeweled harness most gorgeous to see, riding curiously up amid the
flowers, whose perfume filled their hearts with happiness and hope. The
further they rode the more they longed to tarry forever in this fair
place. And when each one at last dismounted at the palace gate, and,
going into the great hall, saw the Princess herself, more fair than any
flower, sitting on her golden throne, he invariably fell upon his knees
without delay, and begged her to let him be her very ownest Prince.

But the Princess always smiled mischievously and shook her head,
saying,--

"I have no mind to exchange hearts, save with him who can find mine,
where it is hidden among my flowers. Guess me my favorite flower, dear
Prince, and I am yours."

This she said to every prince in turn. She did not greatly care to have
any prince for her very ownest own, for she was happy enough among her
flowers without one. But the Prince, whoever he might be, when he heard
her strange words, would go out eagerly into the garden and wander,
wander long among the flowers, searching to find the sweetest and most
beautiful, which must be his lady's favorite. And, of course, he
selected his own favorite, whatever that was. It might be that he would
choose a great, wonderful rose. At the proper time he would kneel and
present it to the Princess, saying confidently,--

"O fair Princess, surely I have found the flower of your heart. See the
beautiful rose! Give it then to me to wear always, as your very ownest
Prince."

But the Princess, glancing at the rose, would shake her head and say,--

"Nay! I love the roses, too. But my heart is not there, O Prince. You
are not to be my lord, or you would have chosen better."

Then she would retire into her chamber, to be no more seen while that
Prince remained in the palace. Presently he would depart, riding
sorrowfully down the hill on his gorgeous steed, amid the laughing
flowers. And the Princess would be left to enjoy her garden in peace
until the next prince should arrive.

It might be that this one would guess the glorious nodding poppy to be
his lady's choice. But he would be no nearer than the other. A later
comer would perhaps choose a gay tulip; another a fair and quiet lily;
still another earnest soul would select the passion-flower, noble and
mysterious. But at all of these the Princess shook her head and denied
them. There had never yet come a prince to the hill who found her
heart's true flower. And the Princess lived on among her posies, very
happy and very content, growing fairer and fairer, sweeter and sweeter,
with their bloom upon her cheek and their fragrance in her breath. There
never was seen a more beautiful princess than Fleurette.

Now the Princess loved to rise very early in the morning, before any of
her people were awake, and to steal down by a secret staircase into the
garden while it was yet bright with dew and newly wakened happiness. She
loved to put on a gown of coarse green stuff, wherein she herself looked
like a dainty pink and white flower in its sheath, and with a little
trowel to dig in the fragrant mould at the roots of her plants, or train
the vines with her slender fingers.

No one suspected that she did this, and she would not have had them
suspect it for the world. For if the palace people had known, they
would have followed and annoyed her with attentions and suggestions.
They would have brought her gloves to protect her pretty hands, and a
veil, and parasol, and a rug upon which to kneel--if kneel she
must--while weeding the flower-beds. Indeed, they would scarcely have
allowed her to do anything at all. For were there not gardeners to
attend to all this; and why should she bother herself to do anything but
enjoy the blossoms when they were picked for her? They did not know,
poor things, that the greatest joy in a flower is to watch and help it
grow from a funny little seed into a leaf, then a tall green stalk, then
a waking bud, until finally it keeps the promise of its first sprouting,
and becomes a blossom. They did not guess that the happiest hours of the
Princess's life were those which she spent in the early morning tending
her flower-babies, while her fond courtiers, and even the curious
princes on their way to woo her, were still wasting the best part of the
day on lazy pillows. Many a time the Gardener declared that a fairy must
tend the royal flowers, so wonderfully did they flourish, free from
weed or worm or withering leaf. It even seemed to him sometimes that he
could trace a delicate perfumed touch which had blessed their leaves
before his coming. When he told this to Fleurette she only smiled
sweetly at him. But in her heart she laughed; for she was a merry
Princess.

One beautiful morning the Princess arose as usual, soon after sunrise,
and, putting on her green flower-gown, stole down the secret staircase
into the garden. There it lay, all fresh and wonderful, sparkling with
diamond dewdrops. The Princess Fleurette walked up and down the paths,
smiling at the blossoms, which held up their pretty faces and seemed to
smile back at her, as if she were another flower. Sometimes she kneeled
down on her royal knees in the gravel, bending over to kiss the flowers
with her red lips. Sometimes she paused to punish a greedy worm, or a
rude weed which had crowded in among the precious roots. Sometimes with
her little golden scissors she snipped off a withered leaf or a faded
flower of yesterday. Up and down the paths she passed, singing happily
under her breath, but seldom plucking a flower; for she loved best to
see them growing on their green stalks.

[Illustration: THE PRINCESS FLEURETTE]

She came at last to a little summer-house, up which climbed
morning-glories, blue and pink and white--fairy flowers of early
morning, which few of her people ever saw, because they rose so late.
For by the time those lazy folk were abroad, the best part of the day
was spent; and the little morning-glories, having lived it happily, were
ready for their rest. They drowsed and nodded and curled up tight into a
long sleep, in which they missed nothing at all of the later day.

When Fleurette spied the morning-glories she clapped her little hands,
and, running up to the arbor, danced about on her tiptoes, whispering,--

"Good-morning, little dears! Good-morning, my beautiful ones. How fresh
and sweet and fair you are!" And, plucking a single blossom, a cup of
the frailest pink, she placed it in her yellow hair, her only
ornament. Then she danced toward the little arbor, for it was her
favorite early-morning bower. But when she came to the door, instead of
entering, she started back with a scream. For through the morning-glory
vines two bright eyes were peering at her.

"Peek-a-boo!" said a merry voice. And out stepped a lad with a smiling,
handsome face. He was dressed all in green. By his side hung a sword,
and over his shoulder he bore a little lute, such as minstrels use.

"Good-morning, merry maiden," he said, doffing his cap and bowing very
low. "You, too, love flowers in the early morning. We have good taste,
we two, alone of all this place, it seems."

"You are not of this place. How came you here?" asked the Princess,
stepping back and frowning somewhat. "Do you not know that this is the
garden of a Princess, who allows no one to visit it between dusk and the
third hour after sunrise?"

"Ah!" cried the youth, with a merry laugh. "That I learned yesterday
down below there in the village. And a foolish law it is. If the
Princess knows no better than to forbid the sight of her garden when it
is most beautiful, then the Princess deserves to be disobeyed. And for
that matter, pretty maiden, are not you, too, a trespasser at this early
hour? Aha! Oho!" The lad laughed, teasingly, shaking his finger at her.

The Princess bit her lip to keep from laughing. But she said as sternly
as she could: "You are rude, Sir Greencoat. I am one of the best friends
the Princess has. She allows me to come here at this hour, alone of all
the world."

"Ah, share the right with me, dear maiden, share it with me!" exclaimed
the Stranger. "Let me play with you here in the garden early in the
morning. Do not tell her of my fault; but let me repeat it again, and
yet again, while I remain in this land."

The Princess hesitated, then answered him with a question. "You are then
of another country? You are soon to go away?"

"Yes, I am of a far country. My name is Joyeuse, and I am a merry
fellow,--a traveler, a minstrel, a swordsman, an herb-gatherer. I have
earned my bread in many ways. I was passing through this country when
the fragrance of this wondrous garden met my flower-loving nose, guiding
me hither. Ah, how beautiful it is! Because I wished to see it at its
best in early morning I stole through the gates at sundown, and spent
the night in yonder little arbor. I have been wandering ever since among
the flowers, until I heard your voice singing. Then I stole back here to
hide, for I was too happy to risk being discovered and sent away."

"You are a bold, bad fellow, Joyeuse," said Fleurette, laughing; "and I
have a mind to tell the Princess about you and your wanderings."

"Would she be so very angry?" asked the Stranger. "I will not pluck a
single bud. I love them all too dearly, just as you do, dear maiden, for
I have watched you. Ay, I could almost tell which is your favorite
flower--"

"Nay, that you cannot do," said the Princess hastily. "No one knows
that."

"Aha!" cried the lad. "You make a secret of it, even as does your
mistress, the Princess Fleurette. I have heard how she will choose for
her Prince only him who finds the flower which holds her heart. I had
thought one time to find that flower, and become her Prince."

"You!" cried the Princess, starting with surprise.

"Ay, why not? I could fight for her, and defend her with my life, if
need be. I could sing and play to make her merry. I could teach her many
things to make her wise. I am skilled in herbs and lotions, and I could
keep her people in health and happiness. Moreover, I love flowers as
well as she,--better, since I love them at their best in this early
morning: even as you love them, fair maiden. I should not make so poor a
prince for this garden. But now that I have seen you, little flower, I
have no longing to be a prince. I would not win the Princess if I
might. For you must be fairer than she--as you are fairer even than the
flowers, your sisters. Ah, I have an idea! I believe that _you_ are that
very flower, the fairest one, whereon the Princess has set her heart.
Tell me, is it not so?"

"Indeed no!" cried the Princess, turning very pink at his flattery. "How
foolishly you speak! But I must hasten back to the palace, or we shall
be discovered and some one will be punished."

"And shall I see you among the maidens of the Princess when I present
myself before her?" asked Joyeuse eagerly.

"Oh, you must not do that!" exclaimed Fleurette. "You must not try to
see the Princess to-day. This is a bad time. Perhaps to-morrow--" She
hesitated.

"But you will come again to the garden?" he begged.

She shook her head. "No, not to-day, Joyeuse."

"Then to-morrow you will come? Promise that you will be here to-morrow
morning early, to play with me for a little while?" he persisted.

The Princess laughed a silvery little laugh. "Who knows whom you may
find if you are in the garden again to-morrow morning early." And
without another word she slipped away before Joyeuse could tell which
way she went. For she knew every turning of the paths and all the
windings between the hedges, which were puzzling to strangers.